 Definition
Airmass may be defined as a large body of air whose physical properties especially temperature, moisture content, and lapse rate (of temperature), are more or less uniform horizontally for hundreds of kilometres.

Air mass is a large, horizontal, homogeneous body of air that may cover thousands of square kilometers and extend upward for thousands of meters.

The nature and degree of uniformity of air mass properties depend upon 
The topographic characteristics, 
The properties of the source area and direction of its movement, 
Changes introduced in the air mass during its journey away from the source area
The age of air mass’

Source Region
The extensive areas over which air masses originate or form are called source regions whose nature and properties largely determine the temperature and moisture characteristics of air masses.  An air mass originates when atmospheric conditions remain stable and uniform over an extensive area for fairly long period. 
An ideal source region of air mass must possess the following essential conditions. 
There must be extensive and homogeneous earth’s surface so that it may possess uniform temperature and moisture conditions.
There should not be convergence of air, rather there should be divergence of air flow so that the air may stay over the region for longer period of time. Atmospheric conditions should be stable for considerable long period of time so that the air may attain the characteristics of the surface

There are 6 major (primary) source regions of air masses on the earth’s surface. 
Polar oceanic areas (North Atlantic Ocean between Canada and Northern Europe, and North Pacific Ocean between Siberia and Canada-during winter season), 
Polar and arctic continental areas (snow-converted areas of Eurasia and North America, and Arctic region during winter season), 
Tropical oceanic areas (anticyclonic areas throughout the year), 
Tropical continental areas (North Africa-Sahara, Asia, Mississippi Valley zone of the USA-most developed in summers), 
Equatorial regions (zone located between trade winds-active throughout the year), and 
Monsoon lands of S.E. Asia. 
Classification of source region
There are two approaches to the classification of air masses e.g.
 Geographical classification
 Thermodynamic classification. 
Geographical Classification
The geographical classification of air masses is based on the characteristic features of the source regions. Trewartha has classified air masses on the basis of their geographical locations into two broad categories 
Polar air mass (P)
Tropical air mass
This is further divided into:
Continental polar air mass (cP) 
Maritime polar air mass (mP) 
Continental tropical air mass (cT) 
Maritime tropical air mass (mT)
The polar continental air masses
 Originate over the extensive cold surfaces of central Canada and Siberia. These air masses have different physical characteristics during summer and winter seasons. 
The polar continental air masses are generally cold and dry but when these move over warmer surfaces they are heated from below and become unstable and moist to some extent resulting into the formation of limited clouds mainly low stratocumulus. , 
The winter time polar continental air mass after being originated over frozen land surface of central Canada, bring extreme cold weather in the Mississippi plains of the USA. 
When these air masses move over the oceanic surfaces, they are warmed from below and become warm and give some precipitation through cumulus or low stratocumulus cloud.

Maritime Polar Air masses
when continental polar air masses (cP) move out from their source regions and travel over oceanic surfaces of high latitudes, their lower parts are heated from below by the relatively warm surfaces of open oceans and thus become maritime polar air masses (mP) after such modifications. 
When such modified maritime polar air masses strike the mountain barriers, they are mechanically forced to ascend, become unstable and the convective instability results in condensation and much precipitation on the windward slopes .

Continental tropical air masses
The continental tropical air masses have their source regions in the subtropical high pressure areas of hot deserts located between 20°- 30° latitudes in both the hemispheres which are characterized by vertical descent and horizontal divergence of winds. 
These air masses are characterized by very high temperature (above 40°C), least moisture content, steep lapse rate, atmospheric stability, and dry weather. 
These air masses seldom move out from their source regions, but whenever they move out to ocean surfaces, they are modified to maritime tropical air masses

Maritime tropical air masses
The maritime tropical air masses have their source regions over warm ocean surfaces of tropical regions confined between 30°N and 30°S latitudes. 
These are warm, moist and unstable air masses and more extensive in areal context. 
They are associated with convective instability, cumulus and cumulonimbus clouds which give abundant rainfall when the air mass is associated with frontal activity or is forced to ascend by mountain barriers. 
Maritime tropical air masses are modified and become stable when they move towards the poles and travel over colder water (of oceans) or land surfaces, whereas they become unstable when they move over warm land surface.

Thermo dynamic Classification
Based on thermodynamic and mechanical (dynamic) modifications air masses are divided in to:    
                             (l) cold air mass 
                            (2) warm air mass, 
 (1)Cold air masses
Cold air masses originate in the polar and arctic regions. The properties of Cold air masses:
  The temperature of the areas where cold air masses reach starts decreasing. 
The air mass is warmed from below and thus normal lapse rate increases and the air becomes unstable. This mechanism causes convection currents. 
 If the cold air mass lies over warm ocean surface, then its specific humidity increases and cumulonimbus clouds are formed.

  Cold air masses are further divided into
 (a) continental cold air mass, and 
 (b) maritime cold air mass. 
(2)Warm air mass
Warm air mass is that whose temperature is greater than the surface temperature of the areas over which it moves. Such air mass is cooled from below and thus its lower layer becomes stable due to which its vertical movement stops. Warm air masses generally originate in the subtropical regions characterized by anticyclonic conditions. They are further divided into
                                     (a) continental warm air mass
                                     (b) maritime warm air mass. 

